---
title: Custom software rustproofing — building products that last
published_url: https://blog.civilcode.io/custom-software-rustproofing-building-products-that-last-c71e6b1a1fee
---

# Custom software rustproofing — building products that last

Software subscriptions and software as a service (SaaS) are becoming much more accepted and useful
ways to keep software up to date and performing well. This approach isn’t limited to off-the-shelf
software. The same ongoing update methodology applies to custom software as well.

Software subscriptions and SaaS are good examples of thinking of software as a “product.” The other
approach is to think of software as a “project.” The project-based approach used to be the accepted
norm for software development. Each project had a fixed scope and set of deliverables. When the end
date was reached and the final deliverable was moved to a production environment, the project was
over. Apart from bug fixes, the software remained unchanged until the next major release.

## Implementing needs and wants

The product approach stays anchored to actual requirements, with more features and functionality
added continuously to support a business objective. At the beginning, there’s usually a big list of
needs and wants that require prioritizing into must-haves and nice-to-haves. As the software is
developed and refined, the must-haves are implemented first, and then the list of nice-to-haves and
any bug fixes are re-evaluated with feedback from end users.

## Custom software evolves as a product

As internal and external customers use your custom software, their behavior can change, affecting
the direction that development can take. What may have seemed like a small nice to have feature in
the early planning stage can have a big impact on the users. User feedback and unexpected results
can and should affect the priority list for upcoming implementations.

Opening up the feedback loop with users also instills a sense of ownership and trust. When your
internal and external customers see that they’re being listened to and valued, the quality of their
input will improve, and they’ll offer ideas to help make their tasks more efficient.

## Seeing results from each version

By implementing enhanced versions of your custom software product, you can see results such as
improved efficiencies, increased usage of the software, and increased interest in what’s included in
the next version.

## With software products, users expect change

People can get extremely attached to tools they know well, even if they’re not efficient. By making
small software improvements frequently, changes can seem less threatening, and a normal part of
business as usual instead of a major upheaval. Learning new features is easier in small doses.

## New releases respond to current needs and changing business priorities

Continuous releases prevent custom software from becoming outdated. By quickly responding to the
most important, current priorities, the software grows and evolves with your business, adding
functionality you need quickly.

Instead of waiting for a massive planning session, open lines of communication allow ideas to be
captured as they arise, and either be prioritized or drop down the rankings. An open flow of
communication throughout the year keeps input more balanced, instead of skewing features to the
industry trends and top priorities that happen to coincide with the timing of a big yearly
brainstorming.